Provision 384.456.12.6 of the [[Fengu-Golgari Convention of 2452]] stipulates that all member nations of the IntraGalactic Astronomy Review Board and Xenology Annex shall have equal access to Golgari artifacts on Mizar-5. At the same time, to preserve artifacts for study for future generations, avoid favoritism, and prevent the collapse of less psychologically advanced civilizations, strict access controls have been implemented. Please observe the following rules. All time limits are given in standard Mizar-5 days or fractions of a day.

- Artifacts may not be removed from Mizar-5 under any circumstance. Artifacts which have been removed must be returned, even if you are not in a member nation or did not sign the convention.
- Access to artifacts is keycard and DNA locked. If your keycard is missing, stolen, or altered report the incident to security immediately. Do not borrow or lend keycards, including to lab assistants. Species without DNA will be provided synthetic DNA vials on request.
- Artifacts should be signed out and back in *promptly* before removal for study to local labs, and then signed back in. Attach two accompanying timestamp cards (digital timecards not acceptable). Yes, even if you are returning it the same day.
- Civilizations without [[Sanity Certification]] should avoid examining alien artifacts that contain written text, artwork, computers, or music. You, or your entire civilization, may be destroyed. Do not just ask a friend with certification whether it is okay. If you are unsure if something is artwork, ask your supervisor.
- Do not take artifacts outside, to the cafeteria, library, bedroom, or other non-laboratory areas. Artifacts must be kept temperature and humidity controlled.
- To borrow an artifact for more than 7 days, your department head must submit Extended Use Request Form 0045D form in triplicate. Typical turn around is 16 days. If you do not get a reponse within 20 days, please resubmit your form.
- Artifacts are for study. If you sign out an artifact, account for its use with biweekly progress reports, and submit any results to your department head within three days of discovery.


*Memo from Mizar-5 InstraGalactic Internal Security and Administration*