Gondar-2 is a life-supporting telluric planet in the [Rho-HY472](Rho-HY472) system. The flora of Gondar-2 have long been cataloged by xenobiologists and xenomusicians alike, as the cacti-like plants that flourish on the planet are highly sought after for their unique properties. The 2002 identified species all make a unique sound, quite unlike anything else, if struck, strung, or vibrated. Because of this, they fetch a high price for musicians looking for a new sound, or a scientist looking for something to spice up the lab.

No fauna are known to exist on Gondar-2, although [Varix Jhothar]]’s last communique describes his crew being killed with a substance similar to [Regina Apiana]] cytotoxin by native fauna. This, combined with a long history of unexplained ship disappearances in the [Archipelago of the Damned](Varix Jhothar]]’s last communique describes his crew being killed with a substance similar to [Regina Apiana](Regina Apiana]] cytotoxin by native fauna. This, combined with a long history of unexplained ship disappearances in the [Archipelago of the Damned](Varix Jhothar](Archipelago of the Damned](Varix Jhothar]]’s last communique describes his crew being killed with a substance similar to [[Regina Apiana](Regina Apiana](Regina Apiana](Regina Apiana]] cytotoxin by native fauna. This, combined with a long history of unexplained ship disappearances in the [[Archipelago of the Damned](Varix Jhothar](Archipelago of the Damned](Varix Jhothar](Archipelago of the Damned](Varix Jhothar](Archipelago of the Damned](Varix Jhothar]]’s last communique describes his crew being killed with a substance similar to [[Regina Apiana](Regina Apiana](Regina Apiana](Regina Apiana]] cytotoxin by native fauna. This, combined with a long history of unexplained ship disappearances in the [[Archipelago of the Damned](Varix Jhothar](Archipelago of the Damned](Varix Jhothar)’s last communique describes his crew being killed with a substance similar to [[Regina Apiana](Regina Apiana) cytotoxin by native fauna. This, combined with a long history of unexplained ship disappearances in the [[Archipelago of the Damned](Varix Jhothar)’s last communique describes his crew being killed with a substance similar to [[Regina Apiana) cytotoxin by native fauna. This, combined with a long history of unexplained ship disappearances in the [[Archipelago of the Damned), has resulted in a popular conception of Gondar-2 as cursed.

Gondar-2 is a popular stop on the [Candaxx Loop]], if merchants are brave enough, to harvest the cacti and [Varphorium](Candaxx Loop](Varphorium](Candaxx Loop), if merchants are brave enough, to harvest the cacti and [[Varphorium) on the planet.

-Selii Niramaned PLM, QAZ, R
