[za3k](/) > [archive](/archive) > [lexicon1](/archive/lexicon1) > History Paradox

A History Paradox is the theory of an occurrence of two or more discrete events that contradict each other happening at the same time in recorded history, with accounts primarily revolving around the simultaneous presence, extrapresence, modification, and/or absence of an object or individual. History Paradoxes can occur as the result of [Extratemporal Anomalies](Extratemporal Anomalies) that fall under observation by two or more individuals with conflicting accounts. Some scholars that adhere to the theory claim that these events are in quantum flux between different timelines, a la [B-Time](B-Time), and that the paradox occurs when observation cannot completely collapse the wave function - this aligns with the observation that those wearing a [Quantum Compression Apparatus (QCA)](Quantum Compression Apparatus (QCA)) have no reported encounters with these paradoxes.

The exact nature of these paradoxes can be difficult to understand, as they conveniently defy direct observation - though the [Blinking Cow Rumor](Blinking Cow Rumor) is obviously farcical, it offers useful material for an example: A cow that is observed and not observed in the same space by two or more individuals qualifies as a history paradox, as does a unique cow observed in two different places at the same time. Another less-observed example is the occurrence of a cow observed by multiple parties to have differing properties (e.g. a "brown cow" vs. "speckled cow.") The absence of a cow observed by several individuals, however, falls under more scrutiny. It could be that the cow has simply gone unaccounted for, but the disappearance can be attributed to a paradox if, under later observation, the cow is found to have been displaced further than mundane travel could account for over the time period of absence - an example of one such event being the Two-Crown Paradox (See [Two-Crown Paradox, The](Two-Crown Paradox, The)) observed under the reign of what most scholars conclude to be Rzeszutko's fourteenth son (See [Elector-Prince Rzeszutko](Elector-Prince Rzeszutko)) which called into question the legitimacy of the already waning Rzeszutko dynasty.

Obviously, the frequency of alleged occurrences of these events makes cataloging the history of the Golgori very difficult, to the point that even their name is called into question with some scholars apparently finding records of a "Golgari" civilization. As such, some details may not align with one-another, even when directly referenced, although it is this scholar's opinion that the others have simply catalogued their findings while stimulant-addled and sleep-deprived. One would do well to remember that the candle cannot be burned at both ends.

-Ken