## D-level technology on Mizar-5

### Aldebaranian

Aldebaranian (see, [Aldebaranians, The](Aldebaranians, The)) technology never reached D-level, stopping at B-level or C-level (analysis differs).

### Golgari

**Industrial Ascendency**: The period of D-level technology in the Golgari civilization. Industrial-level technology enabled economic growth, increasing the standard of living, and especially providing heat and sulfuric acid to all farmholds.

Industrial Ascendency occured after economic unification (see [Golgori Standard Cube]]); after cultural unification (see, [Nemarii Obelisk]]); after religious unification (see [Rotorastriansim]]); but before political unification (see, [Golgari Sovereign Empire]]) and before social unification (see, [[New Golgori Rebellion](Golgori Standard Cube]]); after cultural unification (see, [[Nemarii Obelisk]]); after religious unification (see [[Rotorastriansim]]); but before political unification (see, [[Golgari Sovereign Empire](Nemarii Obelisk]]); after religious unification (see [[Rotorastriansim]]); but before political unification (see, [[Golgari Sovereign Empire]]) and before social unification (see, [[New Golgori Rebellion](Golgori Standard Cube]]); after cultural unification (see, [[Nemarii Obelisk]]); after religious unification (see [[Rotorastriansim](Rotorastriansim]]); but before political unification (see, [[Golgari Sovereign Empire]]) and before social unification (see, [[New Golgori Rebellion](Golgori Standard Cube]]); after cultural unification (see, [[Nemarii Obelisk]]); after religious unification (see [[Rotorastriansim]]); but before political unification (see, [[Golgari Sovereign Empire](Nemarii Obelisk]]); after religious unification (see [[Rotorastriansim]]); but before political unification (see, [[Golgari Sovereign Empire]]) and before social unification (see, [[New Golgori Rebellion](Golgori Standard Cube]]); after cultural unification (see, [[Nemarii Obelisk](Golgari Sovereign Empire]]) and before social unification (see, [[New Golgori Rebellion](Golgori Standard Cube]]); after cultural unification (see, [[Nemarii Obelisk]]); after religious unification (see [[Rotorastriansim]]); but before political unification (see, [[Golgari Sovereign Empire](Nemarii Obelisk]]); after religious unification (see [[Rotorastriansim]]); but before political unification (see, [[Golgari Sovereign Empire]]) and before social unification (see, [[New Golgori Rebellion](Golgori Standard Cube]]); after cultural unification (see, [[Nemarii Obelisk]]); after religious unification (see [[Rotorastriansim](Rotorastriansim]]); but before political unification (see, [[Golgari Sovereign Empire]]) and before social unification (see, [[New Golgori Rebellion](Golgori Standard Cube]]); after cultural unification (see, [[Nemarii Obelisk]]); after religious unification (see [[Rotorastriansim]]); but before political unification (see, [[Golgari Sovereign Empire](Nemarii Obelisk]]); after religious unification (see [[Rotorastriansim]]); but before political unification (see, [[Golgari Sovereign Empire]]) and before social unification (see, [[New Golgori Rebellion](Golgori Standard Cube]]); after cultural unification (see, [[Nemarii Obelisk)); after religious unification (see [[Rotorastriansim)); but before political unification (see, [[Golgari Sovereign Empire)) and before social unification (see, [[New Golgori Rebellion)).

Golgari adoption of E-level technology (*note to human readers: electronics*) was unusally slow. E-level techology was developed early in the [Orianian Wasteland]], but was not widely adopted. Due to [Regina Apiana]], devices had to be carefully designed and popular adoption often resulted in collapse and re-design. The [Revisionist Period](Orianian Wasteland]], but was not widely adopted. Due to [Regina Apiana](Regina Apiana]], devices had to be carefully designed and popular adoption often resulted in collapse and re-design. The [[Revisionist Period](Orianian Wasteland](Revisionist Period](Orianian Wasteland]], but was not widely adopted. Due to [[Regina Apiana](Regina Apiana](Regina Apiana](Regina Apiana]], devices had to be carefully designed and popular adoption often resulted in collapse and re-design. The [[Revisionist Period](Orianian Wasteland](Revisionist Period](Orianian Wasteland]], but was not widely adopted. Due to [[Regina Apiana](Regina Apiana), devices had to be carefully designed and popular adoption often resulted in collapse and re-design. The [[Revisionist Period](Orianian Wasteland), but was not widely adopted. Due to [[Regina Apiana), devices had to be carefully designed and popular adoption often resulted in collapse and re-design. The [[Revisionist Period) also meant improvements and basic technology was independently invented and re-invented time and time again.

Astonishly, the Golgari developed spaceship technology with only D-level technology. This historian believes they were on the brink of skipping directly to F-level or G-level technology, at least regionally, without electricity.

### [Web-Weaver](Web-Weaver)

Web-weaver technology reached D-level early, due to 

<sup>Pay 16© to continue reading this database entry. The GHACT guarantees satisfaction† or your money back!‡</sup>

*[Galactic Hegemony of Associated Commerce and Trade](Galactic Hegemony of Associated Commerce and Trade), Galactic Civilization Catalogue, 180th to 192nd edition. Article was removed starting with the 193rd edition ("non-notable and out-of-date").*
