Oedeon

The capital city of the [Golgori Sovereign Empire]], Great Heart Oedeon (or Oedeon as it is called in less official written accounts) was the cultural and political centre of the Golgori civilisation. During its height before its cataclystic destruction (see [Descent of the New Moon, The]]) it housed between 26-27 million citizens due to official countings, and most likely many millions more in the grey number. After the tragedy of its destruction, the captial was moved into the [Principality of Ionzh](Golgori Sovereign Empire]], Great Heart Oedeon (or Oedeon as it is called in less official written accounts) was the cultural and political centre of the Golgori civilisation. During its height before its cataclystic destruction (see [Descent of the New Moon, The](Descent of the New Moon, The]]) it housed between 26-27 million citizens due to official countings, and most likely many millions more in the grey number. After the tragedy of its destruction, the captial was moved into the [Principality of Ionzh](Golgori Sovereign Empire](Principality of Ionzh](Golgori Sovereign Empire]], Great Heart Oedeon (or Oedeon as it is called in less official written accounts) was the cultural and political centre of the Golgori civilisation. During its height before its cataclystic destruction (see [[Descent of the New Moon, The](Descent of the New Moon, The](Descent of the New Moon, The](Descent of the New Moon, The]]) it housed between 26-27 million citizens due to official countings, and most likely many millions more in the grey number. After the tragedy of its destruction, the captial was moved into the [[Principality of Ionzh](Golgori Sovereign Empire](Principality of Ionzh](Golgori Sovereign Empire](Principality of Ionzh](Golgori Sovereign Empire](Principality of Ionzh](Golgori Sovereign Empire]], Great Heart Oedeon (or Oedeon as it is called in less official written accounts) was the cultural and political centre of the Golgori civilisation. During its height before its cataclystic destruction (see [[Descent of the New Moon, The](Descent of the New Moon, The](Descent of the New Moon, The](Descent of the New Moon, The]]) it housed between 26-27 million citizens due to official countings, and most likely many millions more in the grey number. After the tragedy of its destruction, the captial was moved into the [[Principality of Ionzh](Golgori Sovereign Empire](Principality of Ionzh](Golgori Sovereign Empire), Great Heart Oedeon (or Oedeon as it is called in less official written accounts) was the cultural and political centre of the Golgori civilisation. During its height before its cataclystic destruction (see [[Descent of the New Moon, The](Descent of the New Moon, The)) it housed between 26-27 million citizens due to official countings, and most likely many millions more in the grey number. After the tragedy of its destruction, the captial was moved into the [[Principality of Ionzh](Golgori Sovereign Empire), Great Heart Oedeon (or Oedeon as it is called in less official written accounts) was the cultural and political centre of the Golgori civilisation. During its height before its cataclystic destruction (see [[Descent of the New Moon, The)) it housed between 26-27 million citizens due to official countings, and most likely many millions more in the grey number. After the tragedy of its destruction, the captial was moved into the [[Principality of Ionzh) where it would change between local cities but remain in the region until the collapse of the empire.

Oedeon had many important structures and buildings (however most of them have been completely wiped off the map in its destruction) including the [Zenith Throneroom]] (fully destroyed, only memorials and historical evidence remains)and the [Institute for Psykologikal Masterie](Zenith Throneroom](Institute for Psykologikal Masterie](Zenith Throneroom) (fully destroyed, only memorials and historical evidence remains)and the [[Institute for Psykologikal Masterie) (strangely untouched by the destruction, slight damages through time and erosion).