[za3k](/) > [tbd](/tbd/) > [party](/tbd/party/party) > eleanor

# Party
## Eleanor

- **Character**: Eleanor
- **Race**: [Aasimar](http://dnd5e.wikidot.com/aasimar) (Volo p104)
- **Class**: [Paladin](http://dnd5e.wikidot.com/paladin) 2
- **Class**: [Sorcerer](http://dnd5e.wikidot.com/sorcerer) 1, [Divine Soul](http://dnd5e.wikidot.com/sorcerer:divine-soul) (Xanathar 50)
- **Description**: 
    Eleanor was born into a noble family with close ties to the church. Her father is a paladin and worked as the leader of the city’s guard. Her mother is a leader of the local church. Before Eleanor was even conceived, it was prophesied that Eleanor would be born as a chosen warrior for a god. With this, it is said that Eleanor will have tremendous power to protect the church, but be at significant risk from cults who would want to use her or just kill her. With this Eleanor was born into a very sheltered lifestyle. She hardly left her family’s mansion and was under constant surveillance.
    As Eleanor grew up, the only friends she had were her younger sister, the house servants, and her father who was sympathetic to Eleanor’s boredom. She spent most of her time either studying, practicing how to control her powers, or just spending time with her servants. One day, she saw her father practicing his swordplay and that sparked a sudden interest. He noticed her curiosity and decided to show her the ropes. To his surprise, it turns out that she was a natural, and both decided to secretly continue her training in swordplay.
    As a teen, Eleanor decided to sneak out into the city on her own. She would run into the local fighting arena. She discovered that she really enjoyed seeing the fights. After many more times of her sneaking out, she decided to sign up for a simple match. From there, she discovered that she really liked fighting. She would often sneak out, join several fights, and sneak back in, with some servants and her sister covering her tracks.
    One day as Eleanor was returning home, she discovered that her home was under attack by cultists and bandits. She decided to fight them off and look for her family. She would later find her dad barely standing against a cultist. The cultist demanded Eleanor as they wanted to kill her. Eleanor snuck up and began to fight the cultist. She was almost no match for the cultist, but when they were about to get a killing blow, her father took the hit, which caused Eleanor to be temporarily powered up with divine power. She was able to finish off the cultist and was able to heal her father in time, but he had some lasting injuries.
    Afterward, her mother saw what Eleanor did and scolded her for leaving the house, learning how to fight, and making her worry. Eleanor decided that she had enough of her mom and yelled back at her. There Eleanor decided that she would run away from home, and just to rub salt in the wound, won’t serve her role as the church’s defender, but write her own story and become a legend without relying on her family or the church. She said goodbye to the servants, her sister, and her father, but not her mom, and left home.
    From there on, she traveled around. Beating up bandits, taking on bounties, and becoming a mercenary. She was at top of her game and felt ready for what the world had for her. During her travels, she hear rumors that she’s prophesied in more than one situation.
