[za3k](/) > [tbd](/tbd/) > [party](/tbd/party/party) > Odraz

# Party
## Odraz

- **Character**: Odraz
- **Race**: [Changeling](http://dnd5e.wikidot.com/changeling) (Eberron, p?)
- **Class**: [Fighter](http://dnd5e.wikidot.com/fighter) 3, [Echo Knight](http://dnd5e.wikidot.com/fighter:echo-knight) (Wildemont, p?)
- **Physical Description**: 
> standing about 6’1” Odraz has a face that more or less resembles a “play mask”, pure white with no distinct features, eyes also pure white with no iris or pupils, his hair again as white as a fresh fallen snow is often free and down to shoulders but other times he may wear it in a ponytail
- **Backstory**:
> Odraz was orphaned at a young age after his parents died protecting him from monsters, days passed as he wandered aimlessly through the woods, hoping, praying that someone, anyone would save him. All hope seemed lost as sounds of snarling hungry wolves filled the air, Odraz was about to give into his fate until a kindly older High-Elf wizard came to his aid by dispatching those wolves with incredible magicks. When the danger had passed the High-Elf introduced himself as Sotír and asked Odraz where his parents were, after explaining to Sotír the fate of his parents the wizard offered to adopt Odraz and teach him magic. With nowhere and no one to go to, Odraz happily agreed.
> A couple of years passed and through their training and the time they’ve spent together Odraz and Sotír have grown close, that being said however Odraz’s talent with magic has fallen short but this didn’t stop Sotír from teaching Odraz how to defend himself. Finding Odraz’s talent with magic lacking, Sotír gifted Odraz with two short Hook Swords and began teaching him in the ways of a fighter. It was through this change in disciplines that caused Odraz’s talents to bloom. Despite Odraz finding his calling within a martial discipline this didn’t stop him from trying to mix magic into his techniques. Sotír seeing this and noticing Odraz struggling with trying to put together a concept, Sotír decides to help Odraz by having him focus on his natural ability to reflect, to “Echo” people that he’s seen before and through that hint and Sotír’s guidance and tutelage Odraz was able to put together a fighting style all his own.
> Odraz now nearing adolescence has come a long way with his training and his relationship with Sotír is now more of a Father and Son rather than that of a Savior and the Saved, it was at this time that Odraz’s new family was about to get much bigger. One day while Odraz was left at home by himself, Sotír came back home but this time not alone, instead following closely behind him were three children in similar age to Odraz. The first of the children that Sotír introduced was Jael a young Aasimar boy who had temperament, next was a Shadar-Kai girl by the name of Shael who walked with a haughty self-righteous, and finally was the shy, soft-spoken Yuan-Ti, Kovora. With the introductions out of the way Sotír explained that through the circumstances that brought him and these children together that much like Odraz decided to adopt these three. The first few days were awkward as the children got to know each other, it wasn’t until the three children witnessed Odraz training while they were spying on him that Jael, Shael, and Kovora pleaded with Sotír to train them as well. Jael suffered from the wild magic phenomenon and his anger only added more fuel to the fire so Sotír decided to have Jael try to combine his anger with his wild magic in order for his anger to act as a sort of trigger. Shael and Kovora took more to the magical teachings of their new Father, while Shael was able to follow the teachings and principles the closest, Kovora slowly began to fall behind and decided to focus her attention on alchemical concoctions involving poisons as well as picking up techniques that allowed her to stay hidden and in the shadows where she felt the most comfortable. When everyone had gotten a decent grasp of their new found abilities and techniques the children decided to put together their own little adventuring party called The Hounds, of course with the supervision of their Father they were only able to take on small tasks and chores within the town and nearby villages.
> Time passes on now the children are now young adults, Odraz now 21 and unlike most Changelings Odraz doesn’t use a mask in his everyday life instead he uses his “true face”, standing about 6’1” Odraz has a face that more or less resembles a “play mask”, pure white with no distinct features, eyes also pure white with no iris or pupils, his hair again as white as a fresh fallen snow is often free and down to shoulders but other times he may wear it in a ponytail. Within these past few days of Odraz’s life his dreams have been flooded with visions that always end with the same sentence from a voice without distinction that says “You have been chosen, You must meet with the other four and fulfill your destiny”. Odraz has tried to ignore this prophecy but each time he does it comes back louder and louder with a headache that shakes him from his slumber, Sotír noticing that Odraz has been able to sleep less and less confronts him about what has been happening and hesitantly Odraz explains what he has been hearing. Sotír, knowing that this is something that Odraz can’t run from, does his best with a shaking voice and heavy heart to convince Odraz to listen to the visions. With all of Odraz’s supplies packed and ready, he says his goodbyes to his Father, brother, and sisters and sets out to his new adventure.
